### Theme: 
[[Covenant]]

### Important Characters
[[Adam]]
[[Eve]]
[[Abraham|Abram]]
[[God]]
[[Israel]]

### Passage:
#### Passage 1
> [!bible]+ [Genesis 2:18-25 - NIV](https://bolls.life/NIV/1/2/) [[Genesis]] [[Genesis2]]
>  <sup> **18** </sup>The Lord God said, “It is not good for the man to be alone. I will make a helper suitable for him.” <sup> **19** </sup>Now the Lord God had formed out of the ground all the beasts of the field and all the birds of the air. He brought them to the man to see what he would name them; and whatever the man called each living creature, that was its name. <sup> **20** </sup>So the man gave names to all the livestock, the birds of the air and all the beasts of the field.<br/>But for Adam no suitable helper was found. <sup> **21** </sup>So the Lord God caused the man to fall into a deep sleep; and while he was sleeping, he took one of the man’s ribs and closed up the place with flesh. <sup> **22** </sup>Then the Lord God made a woman from the rib he had taken out of the man, and he brought her to the man. <sup> **23** </sup>The man said,<br/>“This is now bone of my bones<br/>and flesh of my flesh;<br/>she shall be called ‘woman,’<br/>for she was taken out of man.” <sup> **24** </sup>For this reason a man will leave his father and mother and be united to his wife, and they will become one flesh. <sup> **25** </sup>The man and his wife were both naked, and they felt no shame.

#### Passage 2:
> [!bible]+ [Genesis 15:1-21 - NIV](https://bolls.life/NIV/1/15/) [[Genesis15]]
>  <sup> **1** </sup>God’s Covenant With Abram<br/>After this, the word of the Lord came to Abram in a vision:<br/>“Do not be afraid, Abram.<br/>I am your shield,<br/>your very great reward.” <sup> **2** </sup>But Abram said, “O Sovereign Lord, what can you give me since I remain childless and the one who will inherit my estate is Eliezer of Damascus?” <sup> **3** </sup>And Abram said, “You have given me no children; so a servant in my household will be my heir.” <sup> **4** </sup>Then the word of the Lord came to him: “This man will not be your heir, but a son coming from your own body will be your heir.” <sup> **5** </sup>He took him outside and said, “Look up at the heavens and count the stars—if indeed you can count them.” Then he said to him, “So shall your offspring be.” <sup> **6** </sup>Abram believed the Lord, and he credited it to him as righteousness. <sup> **7** </sup>He also said to him, “I am the Lord, who brought you out of Ur of the Chaldeans to give you this land to take possession of it.” <sup> **8** </sup>But Abram said, “O Sovereign Lord, how can I know that I will gain possession of it?” <sup> **9** </sup>So the Lord said to him, “Bring me a heifer, a goat and a ram, each three years old, along with a dove and a young pigeon.” <sup> **10** </sup>Abram brought all these to him, cut them in two and arranged the halves opposite each other; the birds, however, he did not cut in half. <sup> **11** </sup>Then birds of prey came down on the carcasses, but Abram drove them away. <sup> **12** </sup>As the sun was setting, Abram fell into a deep sleep, and a thick and dreadful darkness came over him. <sup> **13** </sup>Then the Lord said to him, “Know for certain that your descendants will be strangers in a country not their own, and they will be enslaved and mistreated four hundred years. <sup> **14** </sup>But I will punish the nation they serve as slaves, and afterward they will come out with great possessions. <sup> **15** </sup>You, however, will go to your fathers in peace and be buried at a good old age. <sup> **16** </sup>In the fourth generation your descendants will come back here, for the sin of the Amorites has not yet reached its full measure.” <sup> **17** </sup>When the sun had set and darkness had fallen, a smoking firepot with a blazing torch appeared and passed between the pieces. <sup> **18** </sup>On that day the Lord made a covenant with Abram and said, “To your descendants I give this land, from the river of Egypt to the great river, the Euphrates— <sup> **19** </sup>the land of the Kenites, Kenizzites, Kadmonites, <sup> **20** </sup>Hittites, Perizzites, Rephaites, <sup> **21** </sup>Amorites, Canaanites, Girgashites and Jebusites.”

#### Passage 3:
> [!bible]+ [Exodus 14:19-31 - NIV](https://bolls.life/NIV/2/14/) [[Exodus]] [[Exodus14]]
>  <sup> **19** </sup>Then the angel of God, who had been traveling in front of Israel’s army, withdrew and went behind them. The pillar of cloud also moved from in front and stood behind them, <sup> **20** </sup>coming between the armies of Egypt and Israel. Throughout the night the cloud brought darkness to the one side and light to the other side; so neither went near the other all night long. <sup> **21** </sup>Then Moses stretched out his hand over the sea, and all that night the Lord drove the sea back with a strong east wind and turned it into dry land. The waters were divided, <sup> **22** </sup>and the Israelites went through the sea on dry ground, with a wall of water on their right and on their left. <sup> **23** </sup>The Egyptians pursued them, and all Pharaoh’s horses and chariots and horsemen followed them into the sea. <sup> **24** </sup>During the last watch of the night the Lord looked down from the pillar of fire and cloud at the Egyptian army and threw it into confusion. <sup> **25** </sup>He made the wheels of their chariots come off so that they had difficulty driving. And the Egyptians said, “Let’s get away from the Israelites! The Lord is fighting for them against Egypt.” <sup> **26** </sup>Then the Lord said to Moses, “Stretch out your hand over the sea so that the waters may flow back over the Egyptians and their chariots and horsemen.” <sup> **27** </sup>Moses stretched out his hand over the sea, and at daybreak the sea went back to its place. The Egyptians were fleeing toward it, and the Lord swept them into the sea. <sup> **28** </sup>The water flowed back and covered the chariots and horsemen—the entire army of Pharaoh that had followed the Israelites into the sea. Not one of them survived. <sup> **29** </sup>But the Israelites went through the sea on dry ground, with a wall of water on their right and on their left. <sup> **30** </sup>That day the Lord saved Israel from the hands of the Egyptians, and Israel saw the Egyptians lying dead on the shore. <sup> **31** </sup>And when the Israelites saw the great power the Lord displayed against the Egyptians, the people feared the Lord and put their trust in him and in Moses his servant.

### Notes
#### Passage 1 Notes:
When [[Eve]] is created in [[Genesis2]], [[Adam]] is put into a [[deep sleep]]. Even though the word has been historically translated "rib", it actually translates to "[[side]]". The only place translators translate it as rib is in Genesis 2. Thus, side is a more accurate translation. So Adam is essentially split in half and Eve is created as his helper (the Hebrew word is [[Ezer]]. Which doesn't have a good English translation. It is most often translated as "help/helper/helpmate", but that misses out on much of the meaning of the word. Dr. Tim Mackie said it best so I'll quote him. "It's the indispensable deliverance without which the person can't do what they're supposed to do." Eve is Adam's ezer...the one who Adam can't perform his calling without.

#### Passage 2 Notes:
In [[Genesis15]], God tells [[Abraham|Abram]] that He will bless and protect Abram's household. Abram says essentially, "what good will that do? My only heir is my servant, a guy named [[Eliezer]] (a guy who's name includes "Ezer" and it means "God is my help"). So God proceeds to make a covenant with Abram (see [[Genesis 15 - God's Covenant with Abram|Abrahamic Covenant]]). During the covenant, God promises to provide Abram with a nation of descendants and give them the promised land. The nation, as we. saw in [[Genesis12]], will be God's Ezer who He plans to partner with to "bless all nations". 

> [!bible]+ [Genesis 12:2-3 - NIV](https://bolls.life/NIV/1/12/)
>  <sup> **2** </sup>“I will make you into a great nation<br/>and I will bless you;<br/>I will make your name great,<br/>and you will be a blessing. <sup> **3** </sup>I will bless those who bless you,<br/>and whoever curses you I will curse;<br/>and all peoples on earth<br/>will be blessed through you.”

So the passage starts with Abram saying his heir is "Eliezer" and ends with God creating a covenant with Abram to make a nation who would be God's Ezer. 

The passage parallels the creation of Eve who was Adam's Ezer. Abram is placed into the same [[deep sleep]] as Adam was and instead of himself being split, God walks the pathway of blood through the split animals, forming the covenant. Just as Eve was Adam's [[ezer]], so [[Israel]] would be Yahweh's ezer. 

In that same chapter, it points out that God is going to enslave them to another nation ([[Egypt]]) but that Israel would leave with great wealth and that enemy nation would be punished.

#### Passage 3 Notes:
The book of Exodus as a whole is the Creation Narrative of Israel. The whole book repeats on loop the creation, fall, redemption arc. The [[Red Sea]] crossing is a prime example of this motif.

What happens in the Red Sea crossing? Light is separated from darkness, The waters are separated, and dry ground appears. The creation account from [[Genesis1]]. What is being created? The nation of Israel. Where are they going? The Promised Land? Who is being destroyed (or de-created as we are supposed to see it through the entire Egypt narrative of Exodus) by the [[Chaos Waters]]? The evil nation of Egypt who the Israelites just plundered, exactly as God promised to Abram. And to solidify the connection, what walks through the path between the waters? God in the form of a pillar of cloud (instead of smoke) and fire very similarly to the torch and smoking oven from Genesis 15.

### Relevant Tags:
#Covenant #Themes 

2023-10-10